Integrate pages from CS3110 and Real World OCaml (#1766)
ocaml/ocaml.org: data/tutorials/language/3ds_07_monads.md

external_tutorial:
  tag: "CS3110"
  banner:
    image: "tutorials/cs3110_banner.png"
    url: https://cs3110.github.io/textbook/cover.html
    alt: "Ocaml Programming: Correct + Efficient + Beautiful"
  contribute_link:
    url: https://github.com/cs3110/textbook/blob/main/src/chapters/ds/monads.md
    description: "You are encouraged to contribute to the original sources of this page at the CS3110 GitHub repository."
---

This is an excerpt of the page ["Monads"](https://cs3110.github.io/textbook/chapters/ds/monads.html) from the book [OCaml Programming: Correct + Efficient + Beautiful](https://cs3110.github.io/textbook/cover.html), reproduced here with permission.

# Monads

A *monad* is more of a design pattern than a data structure. That is, there are
many data structures that, if you look at them in the right way, turn out to be
monads.

The name "monad" comes from the mathematical field of *category theory*, which
studies abstractions of mathematical structures. If you ever take a PhD level
class on programming language theory, you will likely encounter that idea in
more detail. Here, though, we will omit most of the mathematical theory and
concentrate on code.

> Monads became popular in the programming world through their use in Haskell, a
> functional programming language that is even more pure than OCaml&mdash;that is,
> Haskell avoids side effects and imperative features even more than OCaml. But no
> practical language can do this without side effects. After all, printing to the
> screen is a side effect. So Haskell set out to control the use of side effects
> through the monad design pattern. Since then, monads have become recognised as
> useful in other functional programming languages, and they are even starting to
> appear in imperative languages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Monads became popular in the programming world through their use in Haskell, a nother 
functional programming language. Haskell avoids side effects and imperative features even more than OCaml. But no
practical language can do this without side effects. After all, printing to the
screen is a side effect. So Haskell attempts to control the use of side effects
through the monad design pattern. Since then, monads have become recognised as
useful in other functional programming languages, and they are even starting to
appear in imperative languages.
```

monad* (as in, "additionally writing to a log or string"). Here's an
implementation of the monad signature for it:

```ocaml
module Writer : Monad = struct
  type 'a t = 'a * string

  let return x = (x, "")

  let ( >>= ) m f =
    let (x, s1) = m in
    let (y, s2) = f x in
    (y, s1 ^ s2)
end
```

As we saw with the maybe monad, these are the same implementations of `return`
and `>>=` as we invented above, but without the type annotations to force them
to work only on integers. Indeed, we never needed those annotations; they just
helped make the code above a little clearer.

It's debatable which version of `loggable` is easier to read. Certainly you need
to be comfortable with the monadic style of programming to appreciate the
version that uses `>>=`. But if you were developing a much larger code
base (i.e., with more functions involving paired strings than just `loggable`),
using the `>>=` operator is likely to be a good choice. It means the code you
write can concentrate on the `'a` in the type `'a Writer.t` instead of on the
strings. In other words, the writer monad will take care of the strings for you,
as long as you use `return` and `>>=`.

## Example: The Lwt Monad

> By now, it's probably obvious that the Lwt promises library that we discussed is
> also a monad. The type `'a Lwt.t` of promises has a `return` and `bind`
> operation of the right types to be a monad:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By now, it's probably obvious that the Lwt `promises` library that we discussed is
also a monad. The type `'a Lwt.t` of `promises` has a `return` and `bind`
operation of the right types to be a monad:
```

This way if `promises` is the name of a library, which is how it reads (albeit a little confusing). Or does the Lwt library promise something?
